---
title: An ode to the thigh
date: 2024-10-15
---
I dissected the thigh today. Unexpectedly, it was my favourite dissection so far in medical school. Beautiful, intricately structured layers. The fascia here is not disorganised like it is in other areas of the body; it is a cohesive sheath which blankets and envelops the underlying muscle, save for a small, palpable port-hole through which emerges the singular great saphenous vein, running down to the foot in an unbroken fashion, its route traceable as if following the path of a wire behind a table. This remarkable arrangement earns it the name *fascia lata*, or the “great fascia”.

From the base of the saphenous opening you cut a clean line through the fascia down to the knee. The fascia splits open, but clings tightly to its underlying structures. This close association is a remnant of its function in life: it restricts the external expansion of the lower limb muscles, forcing the pressure of their contractions to be directed inwards, thus massaging the veins of these far-flung regions of the body. This remarkable stroke of biological efficiency leverages the ordinary motions of these muscles to aid venous return where blood’s battle against gravity is at its most acute. Moreover, the degree of this assistance scales with the body’s demand for rapid oxygenation, and the logic for this is purely mechanical—it is precisely the activities which necessitate the repeated contraction of the leg muscles which will drive up oxygen demand in those tissues.

You must peel the fascia lata back, not unlike an orange, to reveal the gleaming and perfectly segmented muscles below. At the top, emerging from beneath the inguinal ligament, the kindred iliacus and psoas major. Below, the three superficially visible heads of the quadriceps, spanning the entire horizontal width of the anterior thigh, possessing the suggestion of great power. Towards the midline lie the adductors, arranged with great care to resemble a Japanese folding fan. Finally, sartorious, the tailor’s muscle, which wraps around the entire compartment like a gift bow.

At first, my wonder and reverence at this sight confused me deeply. Why is it that the sense of a greater design seems most evident in this somewhat arbitrary part of the body? The brain, by its fruit, would be the obvious candidate. Yet to my eye, if we are to consider anatomical structure alone, it is dwarfed aesthetically by the unassuming briliance of the thigh’s arrangement, its elegant hyphenation of form and function. 

Then it struck me—there is nothing arbitrary about the lower limb at all. My consciousness, in its definitional egotism, would of course seek the greatest beauty in its own biological substrate. Nature, however, adheres to a different philosophy. The machine of selection is driven by pursuit. The surviving predator is the one who outruns his prey. The prey animal who reproduces, in turn, is the one who evades successfully. The most fundamental evolutionary act is motion, not cognition; and if motion is the lever, the hind-limb is its fulcrum.